Animal Model Introduction
================

-   [Overview](#overview)
    -   [Origins in quantitative
        genetics](#origins-in-quantitative-genetics)
    -   [Expansion of linear mixed
        models](#expansion-of-linear-mixed-models)
        -   [Paper Discussions](#paper-discussions)

# Overview

## Origins in quantitative genetics

Animal models are rooted in fundamental quantitative genetics, a
discipline with a long and distinguished history within evolutionary
biology and animal breeding. In particular, a simple QG framework
developed for disentangling the factors that contribute to phenotypic
traits, including heritable genetic (and more recently non-genetic)
architecture (Falconer & Mackay 1996; Lynch & Walsh 1998). In it’s
simplest form this framework can be written as:

![V\_P = V\_g + V\_r](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?V_P%20%3D%20V_g%20%2B%20V_r "V_P = V_g + V_r")

Where ![V\_P](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?V_P "V_P") is the
variance of the phenotype,
![V\_g](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?V_g "V_g") is the genetic
variation, and ![V\_r](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?V_r "V_r")
is the residual (sometime called environmental) variation. From this
model is it possible to estimate the amount of phenotypic variation due
to genes (or genetic variation).

In there simplest form, quantitative genetics aims to distinguish the
sources

## Expansion of linear mixed models

These studies have typically used a form of mixed-effects models known
as the ‘animal model’ to decompose phenotypic variance into different
genetic and environmental sources and to estimate key parameters such as
the heritability of a trait or the genetic correlations between traits
(e.g. Réale, Festa-Bianchet & Jor- genson 1999; Kruuk et al. 2000;
Milner et al. 2000; Kruuk, Merila & Sheldon 2001; Garant et al. 2004;
Wilson et al. 2005; Gienapp, Postma & Visser 2006).

![](https://github.com/adowneywall/Tutorials/blob/master/img/2010_Wilson_heritabilityIntro_Fig1.png)

### Paper Discussions

#### Wilson et al. 2010

#### Thomson et al. 2018
